Now think of your router at home that gives you Internet connectivity
in my example, I have a little British Telecom router
that's connected to the Internet, this router doesn’t know about all the routes
in the Internet because that is just too much for the router to handle
so routers such as this have default gateways or default routes
giving them access to the Internet, in the same way here
I have the brand new Cisco router which I've connected to my Local Area Network.
At the moment show ip route
shows me no routes in the routing table
because I haven’t configured any IP addresses on this router.
show ip interface brief
shows me that there are no IP address is configured
on any interfaces on this router.
So on F0/0 I’m going to configure
an address of 192.168.1.128 as an example with /24 mask.
That’s an IP address in the subnet used by my Internet gateway router
I’m going to no shut the interface
and then I’m going to test whether I can ping my VT router
which gives me Internet access, as you can see the ping succeeds
however, in the routing table, I only have that network
I don’t have any other networks and I don’t have a gateway of a last resort set.
So if I try and ping a website such as google.com
it doesn’t work
now that’s partly because I need to enable IP domain lookup
and I need to tell it the DNS server that I’m going to be
using in this case, I'll use Google, so when I try ping google.com
it's trying to resolve that domain name with Google DNS servers
but it’s going to timeout
because this router doesn’t have any route in its routing table
apart from the directly connected network 192.168.1.0
so notice that times out, do show ip route again
we only have that single route in the routing table
so to solve this I can use the command IP route.
now in this case rather than specifying the individual network
I’m going to specify 4 0's 0.0.0.0 which is a default route
subnet mask is going to be 4 0's as well
I need to then specify my next hop router
in this case, it’s my local BT internet router which is 192.168.1.254
so show ip route
my Cisco router only has this static route
and a directly connected route in the routing table.
show that again, there the 2 entries but notice the change
gateway of last resort is 192.168.1.254
in other words, to get to the default route my router can send traffic
to this router, notice the little * which means candidate default route.
so I’ve got static candidate default route
because we've configured 0.0.0.0/0 via this IP address
so can I now ping google.com? The answer is yes, I can.
because this local router knows that to get to any network
it needs to forward the traffic via this IP address.
What about yahoo.com, that works, what about gmail.com, that works
what about cisco.com that works
so by using a single static route I can access networks on the Internet.
now some websites as an example will deny ICMP messages
so cnn.com is not allowing me to ping their website
but I could telnet as an example to cnn.com on port 80
and notice I’ve connected, it says it open, press enter
how much is happening I'll press CTRL-C
and notice I see a bunch of HTML text
it's quite a bit information on the website
but notice HML, so I managed to connect to cnn.com via HTTP
because I have a static default route in the routers routing table
forwarding traffic to a gateway of last resort.